---
layout: post
title: "Why _Rare_ by Selena Gomez Was Not a Ground-Breaking Success, but a Rare Miss"
author: "Robby Ackles"
categories: media-criticism
---

_Robby Ackles is a junior at UCLA studying cognitive science and professional writing. Hailing from Carlsbad, California, Robby has gained experience in media, marketing, and digital writing as part of the UCLA Student Alumni Association and the UCLA Alumni Scholars Club. Robby's go-to fun fact is that he is a triplet, with siblings at USC and UC Berkeley, and enjoys spending free time with his golden retriever, Bailey._

----

Hailed by Vox as a [“terrifically compelling pop album,”](https://www.vox.com/culture/2020/11/16/21561713/selena-gomez-rare-review) by Variety as [“one of the best pop albums in recent memory,”](https://variety.com/2020/music/reviews/selena-gomez-rare-album-review-1203463571/) and by Entertainment Weekly as having the [“pure sound of post-breakup freedom,”](https://ew.com/music/2020/01/09/selena-gomez-rare-ew-review/) Selena Gomez’s recent album _Rare_ does not live up to any of the hype it garnered from all directions following its release. As a mostly skip-worthy album with little appeal to the poppy, vibrant, and empowering songs that her past albums like _Stars Dance_ and _Revival_ provided us, Gomez struggles to give us anything of note in a project with 13 extremely disappointing tracks.


After undergoing various battles related to mental health, autoimmune disease, and physical illness, Gomez’s next project was expected to shed light on the hardships she endured in a meaningful way for an audience that desperately wanted to hear from her. There was an intense anticipation among news outlets and fans alike for her long-awaited return, as the songstress had suddenly emerged after taking time away from the public spotlight. Many thought this new album would deliver a compelling message about overcoming significant obstacles while allowing Gomez to finally tell her side of the story.


By starting with the album’s first single, “Lose You to Love Me,” Selena Gomez set us up to expect an album that would be filled with vulnerability and emotion, yet still have the radio-focused sound that her fans are accustomed to hearing. While the lead single has now generated almost 650 million streams on Spotify alone, it never seems to pick up steam at any point in its three-plus minute duration. One could reasonably describe it as “underdeveloped” or “wrongly-aimed” and not be too far off the mark; “Lose You to Love Me” tells us the story of losing a former lover while losing itself in its obvious desire to be a ballad. To think that a track like that would be anything more than maybe a transition song between bops on any other pop star’s album would be overstepping one’s boundaries. Gomez simply had the opportunity to deliver a much more nuanced take on a devastating breakup that could have generated more buzz around the rest of the album as a whole.


How about we move onto the namesake of the album, “Rare?” For being the first tune you hear when playing the album chronologically, it does little to pull listeners in for any longer than a minute (90 seconds if we’re being generous). Gomez croons, “My ambitions were too high,” and nothing could be more true about both this single and the album as a whole. Her past work has been marked by more emphasis on the vocals and less on the supporting music, but “Rare” desperately needs more power behind it than we get. In a streaming environment where other pop peers like Ariana Grande, Billie Eilish, and Ava Max can easily generate hundreds of millions of streams on the majority of their output, “Rare” does not give the listener enough pizazz to continue streaming for the next 12 tracks.



If we dive deeper into the heart of the album, we find that this trend of disappointment not only persists, but intensifies. Tracks like “Kinda Crazy” and “Fun” are anything but what their names suggest, and “People You Know” almost makes one question whether Gomez is a singer or just an animated talker. “A Sweeter Place” sounds like it lost its way in a garage of randomly-assorted ‘80s synth albums, and Kid Cudi could not inject any less enthusiasm into his feature even if he tried. (We won’t even address the bizarre murmur that he ends his contribution to the track with, a choice that leads to an unsettling transition back to Gomez’s vocals). In “Dance Again,” Gomez sings, “I kick-start the rhythm,” yet it is apparent that she never actually does that for ... the full 42 minutes of the album? I would love to tell Selena Gomez that enhancing her vocals with only clapping sounds doesn’t hold up well, but it seems like she took that artistic decision and ran with it for the entirety of the album. Such a reconsideration would require her to just start the album over again  —  which  would not be the worst case scenario in  this context — but alas, I am merely reviewing an existing project here.


I genuinely cannot think of an occasion that one would enjoy listening to Rare, much less a setting that it would even be appropriate to listen to. While albums like _Future Nostalgia_ by Dua Lipa and _Chromatica_ by Lady Gaga have a very clear time and place associated with them (think clubbing on a Friday night), Selena Gomez’s collection of tracks does not fit in with any kind of landscape these days. Unless you could consider the music you play for five minutes before falling asleep a subgenre? I’m open for debate on that one. Either way, it’s hard to let an audience in on the story you have to tell when there is a clear lack of emotional connection between tracks from beginning to end.


For a return effort that sent the music industry into an initial frenzy, Selena Gomez does nothing to suggest that she is back with a tone nor a message worth listening to. In fact, an output like _Rare_ should have her team going back to the drawing board and figuring out how to recover the sensational tracks she gave us in past albums and iconic collabs such as “Wolves,” “Taki Taki,” and “It Ain’t Me.” While it is important to recognize and honor an artist’s growth (especially after enduring significant hardship), this transformation has to manifest itself in the form of a new and improved sound with a meaningful story to tell. _Rare_ does little to imply that Gomez is on her way back to great heights in the music industry, and it will take a lot of reimagination to ensure that this flop of an album is not just a rare occurrence.

